readme.md, before:

<img src="doc/logo.png" width="75" height="75" align="right">

# Prometeo

Prometeo is a scalable Ansible control node, which can run in OpenShift.

It exposes a Web API based on Spring Boot accepting a YAML payload and logs the execution steps and errors into a MongoDb database.

<a name="toc"></a>
## Table of Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Getting Started using build scripts](#started_scripts)
- [Getting Started using Europa](#started_europa)
- [Testing the control node](#testing_ctrl_node)
- [Payload format](#payload_format)
- [Querying process status](#proc_status)
- [Web API documentation](#web_api_doc)
- [Ansible Project format](#project_format)
- [Configuration Variables](#config_vars)
- [Developer Mode](#dev_mode)

<a name="started_scripts"></a>
## Overview [(up)](#toc)
Prometeo is an Ansible control node designed to run as a Docker container.
The core is comprised by two processes, namely the Web API and the Log database.

The Web API receives an HTTP POST request with command and configuration information and does the following:
- Creates a new processing Thread
- Creates a global unique identifier (GUID) for the executing Thread
- Passes the GUID back to the requestor immediately and continues processing the request asynchronously
- Creates a processing folder named after the Ansible repository name and the process GUID
- Clones the Ansible repository into the processing folder
- Installs all roles required by the Ansible playbook calling the requirements.yml file
- Executes the playbook
- Removes the processing folder
- Perfoms a callback on completion of the process (if requested)
- Logs all execution steps above to the Mongo database

Additionally, a [developer mode](#dev_mode) is provided to facilitate development of playbooks on the local machine and the creation of CI using docker containers for testing deployments.

The following figure shows the main elements of the application:

<img src="doc/prometeo.png"/>

<a name="started_scripts"></a>
## Getting Started using build scripts [(up)](#toc)

The easiest way to get Prometeo up and running is to use docker-compose to get the Prometeo web API and the Log containers running.

In order to build the required Docker images the [docker-build.sh](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/blob/master/docker-build.sh) script can be executed as follows:

```bash
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/master/docker-build.sh -O docker-build.sh && sh docker-build.sh
```
[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) needs to be installed so that the following command can be run:

```bash
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/master/docker-compose.yml -O docker-compose.yml && docker-compose up
```
To test the Web API is running click on the following link: [Web API](http://localhost:8080).

<a name="started_europa"></a>
## Getting Started using Europa [(up)](#toc)

If you have windows on your PC, the easiest way to get started is to follow the steps below:
- Install VirtualBox on laptop
- Download Europa from [here](https://github.com/gatblau/europa/releases), unzip and import the “ova” file into VirtualBox (File -> Import Appliance)
- Start Europa in VirtualBox and login – details on GitHub
- Run IntelliJ and create a new project from GitHub using the Prometeo repo
- Install Postman and [Robomongo 1.0](https://download.robomongo.org/1.0.0/linux/robomongo-1.0.0-linux-x86_64-89f24ea.tar.gz) on Europa (Robo 3T 1.1 is not yet supported on CentOS 7)
- In IntelliJ settings, install the following plugins:
  - Docker Integration
  - Bash Support
  -	Robomongo
- Restart IntelliJ to use plugins
- In IntelliJ use terminal window to build and then run Prometeo
- Use Postman to test the control node
- Use IntelliJ Robomongo plugin to connect to database and inspect events

<a name="testing_ctrl_node"></a>
## Testing the control node [(up)](#toc)

To test the control node, a payload needs to be posted to the Web API to the **/run** URL. An application such as [Postman](https://www.getpostman.com/) can be used to post the payload.

The parameters for the request are:
- **URI**: http://localhost:8080/run
- **Method**: POST
- **Content-Type header**: "application/x-yaml"
- **Body format**: RAW (with content as per the example below)

or using the curl command for example as follows:

```bash
$ curl -v -H "Content-Type: application/x-yaml" --data-binary "@src/test/resources/payload.yml" "http://localhost:8080/run"
```

The service responds immediately (as it executes asynchronously) passing back a global unique identifier that can be used to query the state of the process later.

The results can be obtained by inspecting the mongo database. [Robo 3T](https://robomongo.org/) can be used to query Mongo with a connection **localhost:27017**.

<a name="payload_format"></a>
### Payload format [(up)](#toc)

The payload needs to be in YAML format, and contain two main elements namely **command** and **vars**, as shown in the following example:

```YAML
---
- command:
    repoUri: "https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_cfg_test"
    tag: ""
    verbosity: "vvv"
    checkMode: "no"
    callbackUri: "https://myapp/callme/"
    project: "PO123"
- vars:
    test_url: "http://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/swagger/swagger-core/1.5.9/swagger-core-1.5.9.pom"
    test_dictionary:
        name: "Martin"
        job: "Elite Developer"
        skill: "Elite"
...
```

The **command** element contains information used by Prometeo to retrieve and execute an Ansible playbook.


| Variable  | Description  | Mandatory  |  
|---|---|---|
| repoUri  | The URI of the git repository containing the Ansible scripts to run.  | yes  |  
| tag  | The tag in the git repository to use or empty if the master is used.  | no  |   
| verbosity  | The level of verbosity of the Ansible execution output that is recorded in the Log database. The verbosity can be v, vv, vvv or vvvv. The default value is v. | no  |   
| checkMode | When 'yes' it will not make any changes on remote systems. Instead, any module instrumented to support ‘check mode’ will report what changes they would have made rather than making them. | no |
| callbackUri  | The URI Prometeo will call back when the process complete. No callback is performed if this value is not provided. | no  |  
| project  | The unique reference identifying the project associated with the request. | yes  |    

The **vars** element contains all the configuration variables required by the executing Ansible playbook.

The format for this section is basically a list of variables in YAML format. The variables in this section are the ones required by the scripts in the repoUri to run.

<a name="proc_status"></a>
## Querying process status [(up)](#toc)

In order to find the log entries associated with a particular process, execute the following query passing the identifier of the process (processId) retrieved when the execution was requested:

- **URI**: http://localhost:8080/logs/{processId}
- **Method**: GET
- **Accept header**: "application/x-yaml" or "application/json"

using the curl command:

```bash
$ curl -H "Accept: application/x-yaml" "http://localhost:8080/log/{processId}"
```
or to get the result in JSON format:

```bash
$ curl -H "Accept: application/json" "http://localhost:8080/log/{processId}"
```

<a name="web_api_doc"></a>
## Web API documentation [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo uses Swagger to document its web API.

To see the Swagger UI go to http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html.

To see the API documentation in JSON format go to http://localhost:8080/v2/api-docs.

<a name="project_format"></a>
## Ansible Project format [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo makes explicit assumptions about the format of the Ansible projects that runs.

Two types of git repositories are required:
- **Configuration Repository**: it contains a playbook, an inventory and a requirements file. The purpose of this repository is to glue together a series of roles to execute the required automation. See the [prometeo_cfg_test](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_cfg_test) repository for an example. This is the repository specified in the **repoUri** variable in the payload. Prometeo clones this repository and executes ansible-galxy using the requirements.yml file to pull any roles used by the playbook.
- **Role Repository**: it contains an Ansible role. Variables are automatically passed by Prometeo to the role. See the [prometeo_role_test](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_role_test) for an example of a role repository.

<a name="config_vars"></a>
## Configuration Variables [(up)](#toc)
The prometeo docker image can be configured by changing the following environment variables:

| Variable  | Description  | Default Value  |
|---|---|---|
| HTTP_PORT  | The port number the Web API is listening for incoming HTTP connections.  | 8080  |  
| LOG_DB_HOST  | The hostname of the MongoDb database used for logging.  | log  |   
| LOG_DB_PORT  | The port number of the MongoDb database used for logging.  | 27017  |   
| LOG_DB_NAME  | The name of the log database. | prometeo |
| CORE_POOL_SIZE | Set the ThreadPoolExecutor's core pool size used to manage Ansible tasks.  | 2 |
| MAX_POOL_SIZE | Set the ThreadPoolExecutor's maximum pool size used to manage Ansible tasks. | 2 |
| QUEUE_CAPACITY | Set the capacity for the ThreadPoolExecutor's BlockingQueue. | 500 |

<a name="dev_mode"></a>
## Developer Mode [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo can run in developer mode to facilitate testing playbooks in the local machine.
Developer mode runs outside of Docker and can be invoked by executing the Prometeo jar file from the command line passing the WORK_DIR environment variable pointing to the location of the folder where the playbook projects are contained.

For example:

```bash
$ java -DWORK_DIR=/Users/[user_x]/IdeaProjects -jar prometeo-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

to create the prometeo jar file execute the *package* goal in maven:
```bash
$ mvn package
```

In developer mode Prometeo does not perform the following operations:
- clone the ansible project repo
- create a process specific folder for the cloned repo
- install roles from the requirements.yml file
- delete the process specific folder

**NOTE:** *WORK_DIR* must point to the **parent** folder to the one that contains the Ansible project.

Commit message:

Adds HTTP and HTTPS proxy environment variables to support scenarios where Prometeo is sitting behind a proxy when cloning git repos.

readme.md, after:

<img src="doc/logo.png" width="75" height="75" align="right">

# Prometeo

Prometeo is a scalable Ansible control node, which can run in OpenShift.

It exposes a Web API based on Spring Boot accepting a YAML payload and logs the execution steps and errors into a MongoDb database.

<a name="toc"></a>
## Table of Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Getting Started using build scripts](#started_scripts)
- [Getting Started using Europa](#started_europa)
- [Testing the control node](#testing_ctrl_node)
- [Payload format](#payload_format)
- [Querying process status](#proc_status)
- [Web API documentation](#web_api_doc)
- [Ansible Project format](#project_format)
- [Configuration Variables](#config_vars)
- [Developer Mode](#dev_mode)

<a name="started_scripts"></a>
## Overview [(up)](#toc)
Prometeo is an Ansible control node designed to run as a Docker container.
The core is comprised by two processes, namely the Web API and the Log database.

The Web API receives an HTTP POST request with command and configuration information and does the following:
- Creates a new processing Thread
- Creates a global unique identifier (GUID) for the executing Thread
- Passes the GUID back to the requestor immediately and continues processing the request asynchronously
- Creates a processing folder named after the Ansible repository name and the process GUID
- Clones the Ansible repository into the processing folder
- Installs all roles required by the Ansible playbook calling the requirements.yml file
- Executes the playbook
- Removes the processing folder
- Perfoms a callback on completion of the process (if requested)
- Logs all execution steps above to the Mongo database

Additionally, a [developer mode](#dev_mode) is provided to facilitate development of playbooks on the local machine and the creation of CI using docker containers for testing deployments.

The following figure shows the main elements of the application:

<img src="doc/prometeo.png"/>

<a name="started_scripts"></a>
## Getting Started using build scripts [(up)](#toc)

The easiest way to get Prometeo up and running is to use docker-compose to get the Prometeo web API and the Log containers running.

In order to build the required Docker images the [docker-build.sh](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/blob/master/docker-build.sh) script can be executed as follows:

```bash
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/master/docker-build.sh -O docker-build.sh && sh docker-build.sh
```
[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) needs to be installed so that the following command can be run:

```bash
$ curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo/master/docker-compose.yml -O docker-compose.yml && docker-compose up
```
To test the Web API is running click on the following link: [Web API](http://localhost:8080).

<a name="started_europa"></a>
## Getting Started using Europa [(up)](#toc)

If you have windows on your PC, the easiest way to get started is to follow the steps below:
- Install VirtualBox on laptop
- Download Europa from [here](https://github.com/gatblau/europa/releases), unzip and import the “ova” file into VirtualBox (File -> Import Appliance)
- Start Europa in VirtualBox and login – details on GitHub
- Run IntelliJ and create a new project from GitHub using the Prometeo repo
- Install Postman and [Robomongo 1.0](https://download.robomongo.org/1.0.0/linux/robomongo-1.0.0-linux-x86_64-89f24ea.tar.gz) on Europa (Robo 3T 1.1 is not yet supported on CentOS 7)
- In IntelliJ settings, install the following plugins:
  - Docker Integration
  - Bash Support
  -	Robomongo
- Restart IntelliJ to use plugins
- In IntelliJ use terminal window to build and then run Prometeo
- Use Postman to test the control node
- Use IntelliJ Robomongo plugin to connect to database and inspect events

<a name="testing_ctrl_node"></a>
## Testing the control node [(up)](#toc)

To test the control node, a payload needs to be posted to the Web API to the **/run** URL. An application such as [Postman](https://www.getpostman.com/) can be used to post the payload.

The parameters for the request are:
- **URI**: http://localhost:8080/run
- **Method**: POST
- **Content-Type header**: "application/x-yaml"
- **Body format**: RAW (with content as per the example below)

or using the curl command for example as follows:

```bash
$ curl -v -H "Content-Type: application/x-yaml" --data-binary "@src/test/resources/payload.yml" "http://localhost:8080/run"
```

The service responds immediately (as it executes asynchronously) passing back a global unique identifier that can be used to query the state of the process later.

The results can be obtained by inspecting the mongo database. [Robo 3T](https://robomongo.org/) can be used to query Mongo with a connection **localhost:27017**.

<a name="payload_format"></a>
### Payload format [(up)](#toc)

The payload needs to be in YAML format, and contain two main elements namely **command** and **vars**, as shown in the following example:

```YAML
---
- command:
    repoUri: "https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_cfg_test"
    tag: ""
    verbosity: "vvv"
    checkMode: "no"
    callbackUri: "https://myapp/callme/"
    project: "PO123"
- vars:
    test_url: "http://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/swagger/swagger-core/1.5.9/swagger-core-1.5.9.pom"
    test_dictionary:
        name: "Martin"
        job: "Elite Developer"
        skill: "Elite"
...
```

The **command** element contains information used by Prometeo to retrieve and execute an Ansible playbook.


| Variable  | Description  | Mandatory  |  
|---|---|---|
| repoUri  | The URI of the git repository containing the Ansible scripts to run.  | yes  |  
| tag  | The tag in the git repository to use or empty if the master is used.  | no  |   
| verbosity  | The level of verbosity of the Ansible execution output that is recorded in the Log database. The verbosity can be v, vv, vvv or vvvv. The default value is v. | no  |   
| checkMode | When 'yes' it will not make any changes on remote systems. Instead, any module instrumented to support ‘check mode’ will report what changes they would have made rather than making them. | no |
| callbackUri  | The URI Prometeo will call back when the process complete. No callback is performed if this value is not provided. | no  |  
| project  | The unique reference identifying the project associated with the request. | yes  |    

The **vars** element contains all the configuration variables required by the executing Ansible playbook.

The format for this section is basically a list of variables in YAML format. The variables in this section are the ones required by the scripts in the repoUri to run.

<a name="proc_status"></a>
## Querying process status [(up)](#toc)

In order to find the log entries associated with a particular process, execute the following query passing the identifier of the process (processId) retrieved when the execution was requested:

- **URI**: http://localhost:8080/logs/{processId}
- **Method**: GET
- **Accept header**: "application/x-yaml" or "application/json"

using the curl command:

```bash
$ curl -H "Accept: application/x-yaml" "http://localhost:8080/log/{processId}"
```
or to get the result in JSON format:

```bash
$ curl -H "Accept: application/json" "http://localhost:8080/log/{processId}"
```

<a name="web_api_doc"></a>
## Web API documentation [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo uses Swagger to document its web API.

To see the Swagger UI go to http://localhost:8080/swagger-ui.html.

To see the API documentation in JSON format go to http://localhost:8080/v2/api-docs.

<a name="project_format"></a>
## Ansible Project format [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo makes explicit assumptions about the format of the Ansible projects that runs.

Two types of git repositories are required:
- **Configuration Repository**: it contains a playbook, an inventory and a requirements file. The purpose of this repository is to glue together a series of roles to execute the required automation. See the [prometeo_cfg_test](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_cfg_test) repository for an example. This is the repository specified in the **repoUri** variable in the payload. Prometeo clones this repository and executes ansible-galxy using the requirements.yml file to pull any roles used by the playbook.
- **Role Repository**: it contains an Ansible role. Variables are automatically passed by Prometeo to the role. See the [prometeo_role_test](https://github.com/prometeo-cloud/prometeo_role_test) for an example of a role repository.

<a name="config_vars"></a>
## Configuration Variables [(up)](#toc)
The prometeo docker image can be configured by changing the following environment variables:

| Variable  | Description  | Default Value  |
|---|---|---|
| HTTP_PORT  | The port number the Web API is listening for incoming HTTP connections.  | 8080  |  
| LOG_DB_HOST  | The hostname of the MongoDb database used for logging.  | log  |   
| LOG_DB_PORT  | The port number of the MongoDb database used for logging.  | 27017  |   
| LOG_DB_NAME  | The name of the log database. | prometeo |
| CORE_POOL_SIZE | Set the ThreadPoolExecutor's core pool size used to manage Ansible tasks.  | 2 |
| MAX_POOL_SIZE | Set the ThreadPoolExecutor's maximum pool size used to manage Ansible tasks. | 2 |
| QUEUE_CAPACITY | Set the capacity for the ThreadPoolExecutor's BlockingQueue. | 500 |
| HTTP_PROXY | The URI of the HTTP Proxy to use by Prometeo to access Internet resources. If not set, no proxy is used.  | Empty |
| HTTPS_PROXY | The URI of the HTTPS Proxy to use by Prometeo to access Internet resources. If not set, no proxy is used. | Empty |

<a name="dev_mode"></a>
## Developer Mode [(up)](#toc)

Prometeo can run in developer mode to facilitate testing playbooks in the local machine.
Developer mode runs outside of Docker and can be invoked by executing the Prometeo jar file from the command line passing the WORK_DIR environment variable pointing to the location of the folder where the playbook projects are contained.

For example:

```bash
$ java -DWORK_DIR=/Users/[user_x]/IdeaProjects -jar prometeo-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

to create the prometeo jar file execute the *package* goal in maven:
```bash
$ mvn package
```

In developer mode Prometeo does not perform the following operations:
- clone the ansible project repo
- create a process specific folder for the cloned repo
- install roles from the requirements.yml file
- delete the process specific folder

**NOTE:** *WORK_DIR* must point to the **parent** folder to the one that contains the Ansible project.
